2022 IEEE 2nd International Conference on Power, Electronics and Computer Applications (ICPECA) | 978-1-6654-4276-3/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICPECA53709.2022.9719134

2022 IEEE 2nd International Conference on Power, Electronics and Computer Applications (ICPECA)

Research on Collaborative Filtering
Recommendation Algorithm
Yuan Qingmin, Chen Xingyu
School of Management, Tianjin University of Technology
Tianjin, China
472457132@qq.com
Abstract—As a crucial technology in personalized
recommendation, collaborative filtering algorithm has been
widely used. Today's collaborative filtering algorithm is mainly
divided into two types, user-based and commodity-based. In
order to make it clearer to user-based with regard to the
differences and application scenarios of the two collaborative
filtering recommendation algorithms from the project, this
article analyzes the definitions, basic principles, similarity
calculation methods, and the advantages and disadvantages of
the two algorithms through the method of comparison. Finally,
through analysis and comparison, the current problems of
these two algorithms and their respective limitations are
proved to provide references for future use and improvement
of collaborative filtering algorithms.
Keywords—Collaborative
algorithm, similarity

filtering,

II. USER-BASED COLLABORATIVE FILTERING
A. User-based collaboratIve filtering
The user-based collaborative filtering algorithm measures
and evaluates user preferences, including various related
users, such as product information searches, reviews, product
purchases, or collection of product data etc., to measure and
evaluate these preferences [2]. Then calculate the attitudes
and preferences of different users to the product or content,
and finally use these data to calculate the relationship
between different users, so that you can make mutual product
recommendations for users with the same preferences. Figure
1 below shows the provision of recommended items for
similar users. In the figure 1, the solid line with an arrow
indicates a preference, while a dashed line with an arrow
indicates a recommendation. The similarity between user 1
and user 3 is expressed. In Fig. 1, both user A and user C like
item 2 and item 3, which means that their interests are
similar, so item 1 and item 4 that user A likes are
recommended to user C.

recommendation

I. INTRODUCTION
Collaborative filtering recommendation algorithm is the
most famous recommendation algorithm, and its main
function is prediction and recommendation. [1] Coordinated
filtering is the current mainstream type of recommendation
algorithm, with a wide variety of tricks, and has been widely
used in the industry. Its advantage is that it does not require
much knowledge in a specific field, and better
recommendation results can be obtained through statisticalbased machine learning algorithms. The biggest advantage is
that it is easy to implement in engineering and can be easily
applied to products. So far, many recommendation
algorithms have been proposed. Collaborative filtering is one
of these algorithms. The most widely used and most effective
recommendation algorithm. In modern commercial
recommendation systems, most of them also apply
collaborative filtering algorithms, and they have achieved
certain success, because in fact, both user-based and itembased methods can achieve high recommendation accuracy.
Although the collaborative filtering recommendation
algorithm has been widely recognized in commercial
systems, it does not mean that the applied algorithm is
perfect. The collaborative filtering recommendation
algorithm still has many unsolved problems, such as data
sparseness and cold start problems. With the rise and
application of the Internet, various social software and
shopping software have followed. User-centric social
networking sites have generated massive amounts of data
related to user interests. So how can we use these data more
effectively to seek recommendation algorithms? The
promotion and improvement of the research has become the
research topic of many scholars nowadays.

978-1-6654-4276-3/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE

Fig. 1. User-based collaborative filtering recommendation algorithm

B. Look for similar users with preferences
For example, as shown in Table I, the ratings of five
users on two products are shown to illustrate how to find
similar users through users' attitudes and preferences for
different products. In the example, 5 users rated two products
separately. Then choose a correlation evaluation method to
measure the correlation between users. Taking the Pearson
correlation evaluation as an example, it will be 0.8-1.0 is a
very strong correlation, 0.6-0.8 is a strong correlation, 0.40.6 is a moderate correlation, and 0.2- 0.4 weak correlation,
0-0.2 very weak correlation or no correlation.

741

21–23 January 2022, Shenyang, China

Authorized licensed use limited to: ULAKBIM UASL - Osmangazi Universitesi. Downloaded on April 10,2025 at 19:27:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I. PRODUCT RATING TABLE

User A
User B
User C
User D
User E

Commodity1

Commodity2

3.5
5.1
4.2
5.2
6.5

6.8
3.4
2.8
5.9
4.2

algorithm. This model is used when the user or item data
volume is particularly large when the collaborative filtering
algorithm is used. Because the matrix in the calculation will
be too large, model-based collaborative filtering appears. It
mainly trains a model offline through technology such as
machine learning, then optimizes the parameters of the
model, and finally makes recommended predictions based on
the user's preference information.

C.Provide recommended items for similar users
When we need to recommend products to user C, we
first check the previous similarity list and find that user C
has a higher similarity with users D and E. In other words,
these three users are a group and have the same preferences.
Therefore, we can recommend products D and E to user C.
But there is a problem here. We can't directly recommend
the products of the previous product 1 to product 5. Because
of these products, user C has browsed or purchased them.
The recommendation cannot be repeated. Therefore, it is
necessary to recommend products that user C has not
browsed or purchased. User-based algorithms can only be
used when there is a certain amount of data accumulation,
that is, a cold start, because this algorithm needs to be
calculated based on the user's historical data, so it cannot be
applied to new users or newly created websites or software.

IV. COLLABORATIVE FILTERING SIMILARITY CALCULATION
METHOD

The collaborative filtering recommendation algorithm
mainly includes two collaborative filtering algorithms based
on user and item-based. The following describes three
evaluation methods for similarity calculation:
A. Euclidean Distance
Euclidean distance refers to the straight-line distance
between two points in Euclidean space, and its associated
norm is called the Euclidean norm, and the earlier literature
is called the Pythagorean metric. [3] The formula is as
follows:



III. ITEM-BASED COLLABORATIVE FILTERING ALGORITHM
AND MODEL-BASED COLLABORATIVE FILTERING ALGORITHM
In the collaborative filtering algorithm, the item-based
and user-based algorithms are very similar. In these two
algorithms, only the part of the user and the product is
swapped. The project-based algorithm is to recommend
similar products to users who may prefer this product, and
the relationship between users is obtained by calculating
users' different ratings for different items, and the scores are
used to represent the user's attitude and attitude towards the
product. Degree of preference. As shown in Figure 2, it
shows the provision of recommended items for similar users.
In the figure, the solid line with arrow indicates like, and the
dotted line with arrow indicates recommendation. The
similarity between user 1 and user 3 is expressed. Simply put,
if user A purchases product 1 and product 4 at the same time,
it means that product 1 and product 4 are similar. When the
user C also purchases the product 1, it can be inferred that he
also has a need to buy the product 4, and therefore
recommends the product 4 to the user C.


B. Pearson correlation coefficient
Pearson correlation coefficient is used to measure the
correlation between two variables X and Y [4], it is value of
Pearson's correlation coefficient ranges from -1 to 1. When
the value of the coefficient is 1, it means that all data points
can be well or completely covered with a straight line, that
is to say, X and Y can be well described by the straight-line
equation to describe the relationship between them, and it is
a positive correlation. When the value of the coefficient is -1,
it means that although the straight line also contains all the
data points, the time shows a negative correlation between
them. If the value of the coefficient is 0, then there is no
linear relationship between the two variables X and Y. The
formula is as follows:


C. Cosine similarity
Cosine similarity uses the cosine value of the angle
between two vectors to express the similarity between them.
When the two vectors point in the same direction, then
according to the calculation of cosine similarity, the value is
1; when the two vector directions are at right angles, the
value is zero; when the two vectors are pointing completely
When the two directions are opposite, then the cosine
similarity is -1. [5] It can be seen from this that when the
cosine similarity calculation is used, the similarity value is
only related to the direction of the two vectors, that is, the

Fig. 2. Demonstration diagram of item-based algorithm

There is also a new model-based collaborative filtering

742
Authorized licensed use limited to: ULAKBIM UASL - Osmangazi Universitesi. Downloaded on April 10,2025 at 19:27:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

size of the angle between the vectors. The formula is as
follows:

VI. CONCLUSIONS
User-based methods and item-based methods have their
own advantages and disadvantages. Content-based
recommendation can solve the cold start problem of new
users and data sparseness to a certain extent, but it cannot
satisfy the diversity and novelty of recommendation.
Recommendations based on collaborative filtering have data
sparsity problems and low scalability. If the user tagging data
is sparse, the item-based method is more accurate, and on the
contrary, the user-based method is more accurate. In order to
learn from each other and effectively integrate the two
methods to improve the recommendation accuracy, a hybrid
recommendation strategy was born, that is, a combination of
multiple recommendation algorithm strategies, which can
effectively avoid the shortcomings of a single algorithm, and
ultimately produce a better recommendation effect than a
single algorithm. At present, many effective hybrid models
have been proposed in the academic community. The typical
hybrid model idea is to use global parameters to linearly fuse
the prediction results of the two methods. The
recommendation system often needs to meet the
recommendation requirements in various scenarios, and for
different recommendation algorithms Fusion modeling can
improve the robustness, diversity, and novelty of the
recommendation system, and can improve the user
experience while ensuring accuracy. Therefore, future
research needs to study better hybrid strategies.


V. COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF COLLABORATIVE FILTERING
ALGORITHMS

The article introduces several different algorithms for
filtering collaboration. Although the calculation method of
similarity is the same, the results based on different
algorithms will be different. The user-based recommendation
method mainly considers the calculation of the similarity
between users, and the items recommended to the target user
must be the items liked by the neighboring users. The itembased recommendation method uses similar items
recommended to users with the highest ratings. Although the
ideas of the two recommendation methods are different, they
are both implemented based on the user item rating matrix.
Therefore, in real applications, more need to consider
application scenarios to implement algorithm selection. In
some news websites, the number of users is far less than the
number of news, and the item dimension is much higher than
the user dimension. At the same time, users' interests and
hobbies are relatively vague, and all kinds of news will be
browsed. Therefore, choosing a user-based approach can
greatly reduce space complexity. At the same time, the
timeliness of news is relatively strong. If a project-based
method is adopted, and news is the dimension of the project,
it is unrealistic to continuously update the similarity of the
project. At the same time, the goods are not very timesensitive. Collaborative filtering applications usually involve
very large data sets, while content-based methods only
require the characteristics of the project information itself,
rather than using interaction and feedback between users.
Content-based recommendation will only recommend items
similar to the items that the user has contacted before, and
the diversity of recommendations in the recommendation
evaluation index is very low. Since the new user does not
have historical behavior data, the preferences of the new user
cannot be obtained at this time, so there will be a user cold
start problem.

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]

Tao Sun, Kun Liu, Shaokai Zheng. "Design and Implementation of
Public Opinion System in Colleges", Proceedings of the 2020 3rd
International Conference on Big Data Technologies, 2020
Li Hui Nian, Jing Wei, Can Bin Yin. "The promotion role of mobile
online education platform in students' self-learning", International
Journal of Continuing Engineering Education and Life-Long Learning,
2019
Tingting Yu, Yimin Hu, Guanping Feng, Ke Hu. "A Graphene‐Based
Flexible Device as a Specific Far‐Infrared Emitter for Noninvasive
Tumor Therapy", Advanced Therapeutics, 2020
Wenwei Dong, Yanlu Xie, Binghuai Lin. "Unsupervised
Pronunciation Fluency Scoring by infoGan", 2019
Minxuan Li. "An improved FCM clustering algorithm based on
cosine similarity", Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference
on Data Mining and Machine Learning - ICDMML 2019, 2019

743
Authorized licensed use limited to: ULAKBIM UASL - Osmangazi Universitesi. Downloaded on April 10,2025 at 19:27:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

